TOOL: less
SOURCE_TYPE: ubuntu_man
SOURCE_URL: https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man1/less.1.html
FETCHED_UTC: 2026-03-11 15:30:36Z

------------------------------------------------------------
Command line options are described below.  Most options may be changed while less is running, via the "-"
       command.

       Most  options  may be given in one of two forms: either a dash followed by a single letter, or two dashes
       followed by a long option name.  A long option name may be abbreviated as long  as  the  abbreviation  is
       unambiguous.   For example, --quit-at-eof may be abbreviated --quit, but not --qui, since both --quit-at-
       eof and --quiet begin with --qui.  Some long option names are in uppercase,  such  as  --QUIT-AT-EOF,  as
       distinct  from  --quit-at-eof.   Such  option  names  need  only have their first letter capitalized; the
       remainder of the name may be in either case.  For example, --Quit-at-eof is equivalent to --QUIT-AT-EOF.

       Options are also taken from the environment variable "LESS".  For example, to avoid typing "less -options
       ..." each time less is invoked, you might tell csh:

       setenv LESS "-options"

       or if you use sh:

       LESS="-options"; export LESS

       On MS-DOS, you don't need the quotes, but you should replace any percent signs in the options  string  by
       double percent signs.

       The  environment  variable  is  parsed before the command line, so command line options override the LESS
       environment variable.  If an option appears in the LESS variable, it can be reset to its default value on
       the command line by beginning the command line option with "-+".

       Some options like -k or -D require a string to follow the option letter.  The string for that  option  is
       considered  to  end  when  a dollar sign ($) is found.  For example, you can set two -D options on MS-DOS
       like this:

       LESS="Dn9.1$Ds4.1"

       If the --use-backslash option appears earlier in the options, then a dollar  sign  or  backslash  may  be
       included  literally  in an option string by preceding it with a backslash.  If the --use-backslash option
       is not in effect, then backslashes are not treated specially, and there is no way  to  include  a  dollar
       sign in the option string.

       -? or --help
              This  option  displays  a  summary  of  the commands accepted by less (the same as the h command).
              (Depending on how your shell interprets the question mark,  it  may  be  necessary  to  quote  the
              question mark, thus: "-\?".)

       -a or --search-skip-screen
              By default, forward searches start at the top of the displayed screen and backwards searches start
              at  the  bottom  of  the  displayed  screen  (except  for  repeated searches invoked by the n or N
              commands, which start after or before the "target" line respectively; see the -j option  for  more
              about  the  target line).  The -a option causes forward searches to instead start at the bottom of
              the screen and backward searches to start at the top  of  the  screen,  thus  skipping  all  lines
              displayed on the screen.

       -A or --SEARCH-SKIP-SCREEN
              Causes  all forward searches (not just non-repeated searches) to start just after the target line,
              and all backward searches to start just before the target line.  Thus, forward searches will  skip
              part of the displayed screen (from the first line up to and including the target line).  Similarly
              backwards  searches  will  skip  the  displayed  screen from the last line up to and including the
              target line.  This was the default behavior in less versions prior to 441.

       -bn or --buffers=n
              Specifies the amount of buffer space less will use for each file,  in  units  of  kilobytes  (1024
              bytes).  By default 64 K of buffer space is used for each file (unless the file is a pipe; see the
              -B  option).   The -b option specifies instead that n kilobytes of buffer space should be used for
              each file.  If n is -1, buffer space is unlimited; that is, the  entire  file  can  be  read  into
              memory.

       -B or --auto-buffers
              By  default,  when  data is read from a pipe, buffers are allocated automatically as needed.  If a
              large amount of data is read from the pipe, this  can  cause  a  large  amount  of  memory  to  be
              allocated.   The  -B  option disables this automatic allocation of buffers for pipes, so that only
              64 K (or the amount of space specified by the -b option) is used for the pipe.  Warning: use of -B
              can result in erroneous display, since only the most recently viewed part of  the  piped  data  is
              kept in memory; any earlier data is lost.

       -c or --clear-screen
              Causes  full  screen  repaints  to  be  painted  from  the top line down.  By default, full screen
              repaints are done by scrolling from the bottom of the screen.

       -C or --CLEAR-SCREEN
              Same as -c, for compatibility with older versions of less.

       -d or --dumb
              The -d option suppresses the error message normally displayed if the terminal is  dumb;  that  is,
              lacks  some important capability, such as the ability to clear the screen or scroll backward.  The
              -d option does not otherwise change the behavior of less on a dumb terminal.

       -Dxcolor or --color=xcolor
              [MS-DOS only] Sets the color of the text displayed.  x is a single  character  which  selects  the
              type of text whose color is being set: n=normal, s=standout, d=bold, u=underlined, k=blink.  color
              is a pair of numbers separated by a period.  The first number selects the foreground color and the
              second selects the background color of the text.  A single number N is the same as N.M, where M is
              the  normal background color.  The color may start or end with u to use underline (with the normal
              color, if by itself), if the system supports it (Windows only).  x may also be a to toggle  strict
              ANSI sequence rendering (SGR mode).

       -e or --quit-at-eof
              Causes  less  to  automatically exit the second time it reaches end-of-file.  By default, the only
              way to exit less is via the "q" command.

       -E or --QUIT-AT-EOF
              Causes less to automatically exit the first time it reaches end-of-file.

       -f or --force
              Forces non-regular files to be opened.  (A non-regular file is a directory  or  a  device  special
              file.)   Also  suppresses the warning message when a binary file is opened.  By default, less will
              refuse to open non-regular files.  Note that some operating systems will not allow directories  to
              be read, even if -f is set.

       -F or --quit-if-one-screen
              Causes less to automatically exit if the entire file can be displayed on the first screen.

       -g or --hilite-search
              Normally,  less  will  highlight  ALL  strings which match the last search command.  The -g option
              changes this behavior to highlight only the particular string which was found by the  last  search
              command.  This can cause less to run somewhat faster than the default.

       -G or --HILITE-SEARCH
              The -G option suppresses all highlighting of strings found by search commands.

       -hn or --max-back-scroll=n
              Specifies  a  maximum  number  of lines to scroll backward.  If it is necessary to scroll backward
              more than n lines, the screen is repainted in a forward direction instead.  (If the terminal  does
              not have the ability to scroll backward, -h0 is implied.)

       -i or --ignore-case
              Causes  searches  to ignore case; that is, uppercase and lowercase are considered identical.  This
              option is ignored if any uppercase letters appear in the search pattern;  in  other  words,  if  a
              pattern contains uppercase letters, then that search does not ignore case.

       -I or --IGNORE-CASE
              Like -i, but searches ignore case even if the pattern contains uppercase letters.

       -jn or --jump-target=n
              Specifies  a  line  on the screen where the "target" line is to be positioned.  The target line is
              the line specified by any command to search for a pattern, jump to a line number, jump to  a  file
              percentage  or  jump  to a tag.  The screen line may be specified by a number: the top line on the
              screen is 1, the next is 2, and so on.  The number may be negative to specify a line  relative  to
              the bottom of the screen: the bottom line on the screen is -1, the second to the bottom is -2, and
              so  on.   Alternately, the screen line may be specified as a fraction of the height of the screen,
              starting with a decimal point: .5 is in the middle of the screen, .3 is three tenths down from the
              first line, and so on.  If the line is  specified  as  a  fraction,  the  actual  line  number  is
              recalculated  if  the terminal window is resized, so that the target line remains at the specified
              fraction of the screen height.  If any form of the -j option is used,  repeated  forward  searches
              (invoked  with  "n"  or  "N")  begin  at  the line immediately after the target line, and repeated
              backward searches begin at the target line, unless changed by -a or -A.  For example, if "-j4"  is
              used,  the  target  line  is the fourth line on the screen, so forward searches begin at the fifth
              line on the screen.  However nonrepeated searches (invoked with "/" or "?")  always begin  at  the
              start or end of the current screen respectively.

       -J or --status-column
              Displays  a  status column at the left edge of the screen.  The status column shows the lines that
              matched the current search, and any lines that are marked (via the m or M  command).   The  status
              column is also used if the -w or -W option is in effect.

       -kfilename or --lesskey-file=filename
              Causes  less  to open and interpret the named file as a lesskey (1) file.  Multiple -k options may
              be specified.  If the LESSKEY or LESSKEY_SYSTEM environment variable is set, or if a lesskey  file
              is found in a standard place (see KEY BINDINGS), it is also used as a lesskey file.

       -K or --quit-on-intr
              Causes less to exit immediately (with status 2) when an interrupt character (usually ^C) is typed.
              Normally,  an  interrupt  character  causes  less  to  stop whatever it is doing and return to its
              command prompt.  Note that use of this option makes it impossible to return to the command  prompt
              from the "F" command.

       -L or --no-lessopen
              Ignore  the LESSOPEN environment variable (see the INPUT PREPROCESSOR section below).  This option
              can be set from within less, but it will apply only to files opened subsequently, not to the  file
              which is currently open.

       -m or --long-prompt
              Causes  less  to  prompt  verbosely (like more), with the percent into the file.  By default, less
              prompts with a colon.

       -M or --LONG-PROMPT
              Causes less to prompt even more verbosely than more.

       -n or --line-numbers
              Suppresses line numbers.  The default (to use line numbers) may cause less to run more  slowly  in
              some  cases, especially with a very large input file.  Suppressing line numbers with the -n option
              will avoid this problem.  Using line numbers means: the line  number  will  be  displayed  in  the
              verbose  prompt  and  in the = command, and the v command will pass the current line number to the
              editor (see also the discussion of LESSEDIT in PROMPTS below).

       -N or --LINE-NUMBERS
              Causes a line number to be displayed at the beginning of each line in the display.

       -ofilename or --log-file=filename
              Causes less to copy its input to the named file as it is being viewed.  This applies only when the
              input file is a pipe, not an ordinary file.  If  the  file  already  exists,  less  will  ask  for
              confirmation before overwriting it.

       -Ofilename or --LOG-FILE=filename
              The -O option is like -o, but it will overwrite an existing file without asking for confirmation.

              If no log file has been specified, the -o and -O options can be used from within less to specify a
              log file.  Without a file name, they will simply report the name of the log file.  The "s" command
              is equivalent to specifying -o from within less.

       -ppattern or --pattern=pattern
              The -p option on the command line is equivalent to specifying +/pattern; that is, it tells less to
              start at the first occurrence of pattern in the file.

       -Pprompt or --prompt=prompt
              Provides  a  way  to  tailor  the  three  prompt styles to your own preference.  This option would
              normally be put in the LESS environment variable, rather  than  being  typed  in  with  each  less
              command.   Such an option must either be the last option in the LESS variable, or be terminated by
              a dollar sign.
               -Ps followed by a string changes the default (short) prompt to that string.
               -Pm changes the medium (-m) prompt.
               -PM changes the long (-M) prompt.
               -Ph changes the prompt for the help screen.
               -P= changes the message printed by the = command.
               -Pw changes the message printed while waiting for data (in the F command).

              All prompt strings consist of a sequence of letters and special escape sequences.  See the section
              on PROMPTS for more details.

       -q or --quiet or --silent
              Causes moderately "quiet" operation: the terminal bell is not rung if an attempt is made to scroll
              past the end of the file or before the beginning of the file.   If  the  terminal  has  a  "visual
              bell",  it  is  used  instead.   The  bell will be rung on certain other errors, such as typing an
              invalid character.  The default is to ring the terminal bell in all such cases.

       -Q or --QUIET or --SILENT
              Causes totally "quiet" operation: the terminal bell is never rung.  If the terminal has a  "visual
              bell", it is used in all cases where the terminal bell would have been rung.

       -r or --raw-control-chars
              Causes  "raw"  control  characters  to be displayed.  The default is to display control characters
              using the caret notation; for example, a control-A (octal 001) is  displayed  as  "^A".   Warning:
              when  the  -r option is used, less cannot keep track of the actual appearance of the screen (since
              this depends on how the screen responds to each type of control character).  Thus, various display
              problems may result, such as long lines being split in the wrong place.

       -R or --RAW-CONTROL-CHARS
              Like -r, but only ANSI "color" escape sequences are output in "raw" form.  Unlike -r,  the  screen
              appearance  is maintained correctly in most cases.  ANSI "color" escape sequences are sequences of
              the form:

                   ESC [ ... m

              where the "..." is zero or more color specification characters For the purpose of keeping track of
              screen appearance, ANSI color escape sequences are assumed to not move the cursor.  You  can  make
              less  think  that  characters  other  than  "m" can end ANSI color escape sequences by setting the
              environment variable LESSANSIENDCHARS to the list of characters  which  can  end  a  color  escape
              sequence.   And  you  can  make less think that characters other than the standard ones may appear
              between the ESC and the m by setting the environment variable  LESSANSIMIDCHARS  to  the  list  of
              characters which can appear.

       -s or --squeeze-blank-lines
              Causes  consecutive  blank  lines  to  be  squeezed into a single blank line.  This is useful when
              viewing nroff output.

       -S or --chop-long-lines
              Causes lines longer than the screen width to be chopped (truncated) rather than wrapped.  That is,
              the portion of a long line that does not fit in the screen width is not shown.  The default is  to
              wrap long lines; that is, display the remainder on the next line.

       -ttag or --tag=tag
              The -t option, followed immediately by a TAG, will edit the file containing that tag.  For this to
              work, tag information must be available; for example, there may be a file in the current directory
              called  "tags",  which  was  previously  built  by  ctags  (1)  or  an equivalent command.  If the
              environment variable LESSGLOBALTAGS is set, it is taken to be the name  of  a  command  compatible
              with    global    (1),    and    that    command    is   executed   to   find   the   tag.    (See
              http://www.gnu.org/software/global/global.html).  The -t option may also be specified from  within
              less  (using  the  - command) as a way of examining a new file.  The command ":t" is equivalent to
              specifying -t from within less.

       -Ttagsfile or --tag-file=tagsfile
              Specifies a tags file to be used instead of "tags".

       -u or --underline-special
              Causes backspaces and carriage returns to be treated as printable characters; that  is,  they  are
              sent to the terminal when they appear in the input.

       -U or --UNDERLINE-SPECIAL
              Causes  backspaces,  tabs, carriage returns and "formatting characters" (as defined by Unicode) to
              be treated as control characters; that is, they are handled as specified by the -r option.

              By default, if neither -u nor -U is given, backspaces  which  appear  adjacent  to  an  underscore
              character  are  treated  specially: the underlined text is displayed using the terminal's hardware
              underlining capability.  Also, backspaces  which  appear  between  two  identical  characters  are
              treated  specially:  the  overstruck  text  is  printed  using  the  terminal's  hardware boldface
              capability.  Other backspaces are deleted, along with the preceding character.   Carriage  returns
              immediately followed by a newline are deleted.  Other carriage returns are handled as specified by
              the -r option.  Text which is overstruck or underlined can be searched for if neither -u nor -U is
              in effect.

       -V or --version
              Displays the version number of less.

       -w or --hilite-unread
              Temporarily  highlights  the  first "new" line after a forward movement of a full page.  The first
              "new" line is the line immediately following the line previously at  the  bottom  of  the  screen.
              Also  highlights  the  target  line  after a g or p command.  The highlight is removed at the next
              command which causes movement.  The entire line is highlighted, unless the -J option is in effect,
              in which case only the status column is highlighted.

       -W or --HILITE-UNREAD
              Like -w, but temporarily highlights the first new line after any forward movement  command  larger
              than one line.

       -xn,... or --tabs=n,...
              Sets  tab  stops.   If  only one n is specified, tab stops are set at multiples of n.  If multiple
              values separated by commas are specified, tab stops are set at those positions, and then  continue
              with  the same spacing as the last two.  For example, -x9,17 will set tabs at positions 9, 17, 25,
              33, etc.  The default for n is 8.

       -X or --no-init
              Disables sending the termcap initialization and deinitialization strings to the terminal.  This is
              sometimes desirable if the deinitialization string does something unnecessary, like  clearing  the
              screen.

       -yn or --max-forw-scroll=n
              Specifies  a maximum number of lines to scroll forward.  If it is necessary to scroll forward more
              than n lines, the screen is repainted instead.  The -c or -C option may be used  to  repaint  from
              the top of the screen if desired.  By default, any forward movement causes scrolling.

       -zn or --window=n or -n
              Changes  the default scrolling window size to n lines.  The default is one screenful.  The z and w
              commands can also be used to change the window size.  The "z" may  be  omitted  for  compatibility
              with  some  versions  of  more.   If  the number n is negative, it indicates n lines less than the
              current screen size.  For example, if the screen is 24 lines, -z-4 sets the scrolling window to 20
              lines.  If the screen is resized to 40 lines, the scrolling window  automatically  changes  to  36
              lines.

       -"cc or --quotes=cc
              Changes  the  filename  quoting character.  This may be necessary if you are trying to name a file
              which contains both spaces and quote characters.  Followed by a single character, this changes the
              quote character to that character.  Filenames containing a space should then be surrounded by that
              character rather than by double quotes.  Followed by two characters, changes the open quote to the
              first character, and the close quote to the second character.  Filenames containing a space should
              then be preceded by the open quote character and followed by the close quote character.  Note that
              even after the quote characters are changed, this option remains -" (a dash followed by  a  double
              quote).

       -~ or --tilde
              Normally  lines  after  end of file are displayed as a single tilde (~).  This option causes lines
              after end of file to be displayed as blank lines.

       -# or --shift
              Specifies the default number of positions to scroll horizontally in the RIGHTARROW  and  LEFTARROW
              commands.  If the number specified is zero, it sets the default number of positions to one half of
              the  screen  width.   Alternately,  the  number may be specified as a fraction of the width of the
              screen, starting with a decimal point: .5 is half of the screen width, .3 is three tenths  of  the
              screen  width,  and  so on.  If the number is specified as a fraction, the actual number of scroll
              positions is recalculated if the terminal window is resized, so that the actual scroll remains  at
              the specified fraction of the screen width.

       --follow-name
              Normally,  if  the  input  file  is renamed while an F command is executing, less will continue to
              display the contents of the original file despite its name change.  If --follow-name is specified,
              during an F command less will periodically attempt to reopen the file  by  name.   If  the  reopen
              succeeds  and the file is a different file from the original (which means that a new file has been
              created with the same name as the original (now renamed) file), less will display the contents  of
              that new file.

       --mouse
              Enables mouse input: scrolling the mouse wheel down moves forward in the file, scrolling the mouse
              wheel  up  moves backwards in the file, and clicking the mouse sets the "#" mark to the line where
              the mouse is clicked.  The number of lines to scroll when the wheel is moved can  be  set  by  the
              --wheel-lines  option.  Mouse input works only on terminals which support X11 mouse reporting, and
              on the Windows version of less.

       --MOUSE
              Like --mouse, except the direction scrolled on mouse wheel movement is reversed.

       --no-keypad
              Disables sending the keypad initialization and deinitialization strings to the terminal.  This  is
              sometimes useful if the keypad strings make the numeric keypad behave in an undesirable manner.

       --no-histdups
              This option changes the behavior so that if a search string or file name is typed in, and the same
              string  is  already in the history list, the existing copy is removed from the history list before
              the new one is added.  Thus, a given string will appear only once in the history list.   Normally,
              a string may appear multiple times.

       --rscroll
              This option changes the character used to mark truncated lines.  It may begin with a two-character
              attribute  indicator  like LESSBINFMT does.  If there is no attribute indicator, standout is used.
              If set to "-", truncated lines are not marked.

       --save-marks
              Save marks in the history file, so marks are retained across different invocations of less.

       --use-backslash
              This option changes the interpretations of options  which  follow  this  one.   After  the  --use-
              backslash  option,  any  backslash  in  an option string is removed and the following character is
              taken literally.  This allows a dollar sign to be included in option strings.

       --wheel-lines=n
              Set the number of lines to scroll when the mouse wheel is scrolled  and  the  --mouse  or  --MOUSE
              option is in effect.  The default is 1 line.

       --     A  command  line argument of "--" marks the end of option arguments.  Any arguments following this
              are interpreted as filenames.  This can be useful when viewing a file whose name begins with a "-"
              or "+".

       +      If a command line option begins with +, the remainder of that option is taken  to  be  an  initial
              command  to  less.   For  example,  +G  tells less to start at the end of the file rather than the
              beginning, and +/xyz tells it to start at the first occurrence of "xyz" in the file.  As a special
              case, +<number> acts like +<number>g; that is, it starts the display at the specified line  number
              (however,  see the caveat under the "g" command above).  If the option starts with ++, the initial
              command applies to every file being viewed, not just the  first  one.   The  +  command  described
              previously may also be used to set (or change) an initial command for every file.
