TOOL: netstat
SOURCE_TYPE: ubuntu_man
SOURCE_URL: https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man8/netstat.8.html
FETCHED_UTC: 2026-03-11 15:30:38Z

------------------------------------------------------------
Active Internet connections (TCP, UDP, UDPLite, raw)
   Proto
       The protocol (tcp, udp, udpl, raw) used by the socket.

   Recv-Q
       Established: The count of bytes not copied by the user program  connected  to  this  socket.   Listening:
       Since Kernel 2.6.18 this column contains the current syn backlog.

   Send-Q
       Established: The count of bytes not acknowledged by the remote host.  Listening: Since Kernel 2.6.18 this
       column contains the maximum size of the syn backlog.

   Local Address
       Address  and  port number of the local end of the socket.  Unless the --numeric (-n) option is specified,
       the socket address is resolved to its canonical host name (FQDN), and the port number is translated  into
       the corresponding service name.

   Foreign Address
       Address and port number of the remote end of the socket.  Analogous to "Local Address".

   State
       The  state  of  the  socket.  Since there are no states in raw mode and usually no states used in UDP and
       UDPLite, this column may be left blank. Normally this can be one of several values:

       ESTABLISHED
              The socket has an established connection.

       SYN_SENT
              The socket is actively attempting to establish a connection.

       SYN_RECV
              A connection request has been received from the network.

       FIN_WAIT1
              The socket is closed, and the connection is shutting down.

       FIN_WAIT2
              Connection is closed, and the socket is waiting for a shutdown from the remote end.

       TIME_WAIT
              The socket is waiting after close to handle packets still in the network.

       CLOSE  The socket is not being used.

       CLOSE_WAIT
              The remote end has shut down, waiting for the socket to close.

       LAST_ACK
              The remote end has shut down, and the socket is closed. Waiting for acknowledgement.

       LISTEN The socket is listening for incoming connections.  Such sockets are not  included  in  the  output
              unless you specify the --listening (-l) or --all (-a) option.

       CLOSING
              Both sockets are shut down but we still don't have all our data sent.

       UNKNOWN
              The state of the socket is unknown.

   User
       The username or the user id (UID) of the owner of the socket.

   PID/Program name
       Slash-separated  pair  of  the  process  id  (PID)  and process name of the process that owns the socket.
       --program causes this column to be included.  You  will  also  need  superuser  privileges  to  see  this
       information  on  sockets  you  don't  own.   This identification information is not yet available for IPX
       sockets.

   Timer
       (this needs to be written)

   Active UNIX domain Sockets
   Proto
       The protocol (usually unix) used by the socket.

   RefCnt
       The reference count (i.e. attached processes via this socket).

   Flags
       The flags displayed is SO_ACCEPTON (displayed as ACC), SO_WAITDATA (W) or SO_NOSPACE  (N).   SO_ACCECPTON
       is  used  on  unconnected sockets if their corresponding processes are waiting for a connect request. The
       other flags are not of normal interest.

   Type
       There are several types of socket access:

       SOCK_DGRAM
              The socket is used in Datagram (connectionless) mode.

       SOCK_STREAM
              This is a stream (connection) socket.

       SOCK_RAW
              The socket is used as a raw socket.

       SOCK_RDM
              This one serves reliably-delivered messages.

       SOCK_SEQPACKET
              This is a sequential packet socket.

       SOCK_PACKET
              Raw interface access socket.

       UNKNOWN
              Who ever knows what the future will bring us - just fill in here :-)

   State
       This field will contain one of the following Keywords:

       FREE   The socket is not allocated

       LISTENING
              The socket is listening for a connection request.  Such sockets are only included in the output if
              you specify the --listening (-l) or --all (-a) option.

       CONNECTING
              The socket is about to establish a connection.

       CONNECTED
              The socket is connected.

       DISCONNECTING
              The socket is disconnecting.

       (empty)
              The socket is not connected to another one.

       UNKNOWN
              This state should never happen.

   PID/Program name
       Process ID (PID) and process name of the process that has the socket open.  More info available in Active
       Internet connections section written above.

   Path
       This is the path name as which the corresponding processes attached to the socket.

   Active IPX sockets
       (this needs to be done by somebody who knows it)

   Active NET/ROM sockets
       (this needs to be done by somebody who knows it)

   Active AX.25 sockets
       (this needs to be done by somebody who knows it)
