TOOL: nslookup
SOURCE_TYPE: ubuntu_man
SOURCE_URL: https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man1/nslookup.1.html
FETCHED_UTC: 2026-03-11 15:30:38Z

------------------------------------------------------------
host [server]
              This  command  looks  up information for host using the current default server or using server, if
              specified. If host is an Internet address and the query type is A or PTR, the name of the host  is
              returned.  If  host  is a name and does not have a trailing period (.), the search list is used to
              qualify the name.

              To look up a host not in the current domain, append a period to the name.

       server domain | lserver domain
              These commands change the default server to domain; lserver uses the initial  server  to  look  up
              information about domain, while server uses the current default server. If an authoritative answer
              cannot be found, the names of servers that might have the answer are returned.

       root   This command is not implemented.

       finger This command is not implemented.

       ls     This command is not implemented.

       view   This command is not implemented.

       help   This command is not implemented.

       ?      This command is not implemented.

       exit   This command exits the program.

       set keyword[=value]
              This command is used to change state information that affects the lookups. Valid keywords are:

              all    This  keyword  prints the current values of the frequently used options to set. Information
                     about the current default server and host is also printed.

              class=value
                     This keyword changes the query class to one of:

                     IN     the Internet class

                     CH     the Chaos class

                     HS     the Hesiod class

                     ANY    wildcard

                     The class specifies the  protocol  group  of  the  information.  The  default  is  IN;  the
                     abbreviation for this keyword is cl.

              nodebug
                     This  keyword turns on or off the display of the full response packet, and any intermediate
                     response packets, when searching. The default for this keyword is nodebug; the abbreviation
                     for this keyword is [no]deb.

              nod2   This keyword turns debugging mode on or off. This displays  more  about  what  nslookup  is
                     doing. The default is nod2.

              domain=name
                     This keyword sets the search list to name.

              nosearch
                     If  the  lookup  request  contains  at  least  one period, but does not end with a trailing
                     period, this keyword appends the domain names in the domain  search  list  to  the  request
                     until an answer is received. The default is search.

              port=value
                     This  keyword  changes the default TCP/UDP name server port to value from its default, port
                     53. The abbreviation for this keyword is po.

              querytype=value | type=value
                     This keyword changes the type of the information query to value. The  defaults  are  A  and
                     then AAAA; the abbreviations for these keywords are q and ty.

                     Please  note  that it is only possible to specify one query type. Only the default behavior
                     looks up both when an alternative is not specified.

              norecurse
                     This keyword tells the name server  to  query  other  servers  if  it  does  not  have  the
                     information. The default is recurse; the abbreviation for this keyword is [no]rec.

              ndots=number
                     This  keyword  sets  the  number  of  dots  (label  separators)  in  a domain that disables
                     searching. Absolute names always stop searching.

              retry=number
                     This keyword sets the number of retries to number.

              timeout=number
                     This keyword changes the initial timeout interval  to  wait  for  a  reply  to  number,  in
                     seconds.

              novc   This  keyword  indicates that a virtual circuit should always be used when sending requests
                     to the server.  novc is the default.

              nofail This keyword tries the next nameserver if a nameserver responds with SERVFAIL or a referral
                     (nofail), or terminates the query (fail) on such a response. The default is nofail.
