TOOL: sudo
SOURCE_TYPE: ubuntu_man
SOURCE_URL: https://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/focal/man8/sudo.8.html
FETCHED_UTC: 2026-03-11 15:30:43Z

------------------------------------------------------------
sudo allows a permitted user to execute a command as the superuser or another user, as specified  by  the
       security  policy.   The  invoking  user's real (not effective) user-ID is used to determine the user name
       with which to query the security policy.

       sudo supports a plugin architecture for security policies and input/output logging.   Third  parties  can
       develop  and  distribute  their own policy and I/O logging plugins to work seamlessly with the sudo front
       end.  The default security policy is sudoers, which is configured via the file /etc/sudoers, or via LDAP.
       See the “Plugins” section for more information.

       The security policy determines what privileges, if any, a user has to run sudo.  The policy  may  require
       that   users   authenticate   themselves  with  a  password  or  another  authentication  mechanism.   If
       authentication is required, sudo will exit if the user's password is not entered  within  a  configurable
       time  limit.  This limit is policy-specific; the default password prompt timeout for the sudoers security
       policy is 0 minutes.

       Security policies may support credential caching to allow the user to run sudo again for a period of time
       without requiring authentication.  By default, the sudoers policy caches credentials  on  a  per-terminal
       basis  for  15  minutes.   See  the  timestamp_type  and timestamp_timeout options in sudoers(5) for more
       information.  By running sudo with the -v option, a  user  can  update  the  cached  credentials  without
       running a command.

       When invoked as sudoedit, the -e option (described below), is implied.

       Security  policies  may  log successful and failed attempts to use sudo.  If an I/O plugin is configured,
       the running command's input and output may be logged as well.

       The options are as follows:

       -A, --askpass
                   Normally, if sudo requires a password, it will read it from the user's terminal.  If  the  -A
                   (askpass)  option is specified, a (possibly graphical) helper program is executed to read the
                   user's password and output  the  password  to  the  standard  output.   If  the  SUDO_ASKPASS
                   environment  variable  is  set,  it  specifies the path to the helper program.  Otherwise, if
                   sudo.conf(5) contains a line specifying the askpass program, that value will  be  used.   For
                   example:

                       # Path to askpass helper program
                       Path askpass /usr/X11R6/bin/ssh-askpass

                   If no askpass program is available, sudo will exit with an error.

       -B, --bell  Ring  the  bell as part of the password promp when a terminal is present.  This option has no
                   effect if an askpass program is used.

       -b, --background
                   Run the given command in the background.  Note that it is  not  possible  to  use  shell  job
                   control  to  manipulate background processes started by sudo.  Most interactive commands will
                   fail to work properly in background mode.

       -C num, --close-from=num
                   Close all file descriptors greater than or equal to num before executing a  command.   Values
                   less  than  three  are  not permitted.  By default, sudo will close all open file descriptors
                   other than standard input, standard output and standard error when executing a command.   The
                   security  policy may restrict the user's ability to use this option.  The sudoers policy only
                   permits use of the -C option  when  the  administrator  has  enabled  the  closefrom_override
                   option.

       -E, --preserve-env
                   Indicates  to the security policy that the user wishes to preserve their existing environment
                   variables.  The security policy may return an error if the user does not have  permission  to
                   preserve the environment.

       --preserve-env=list
                   Indicates  to  the  security  policy  that the user wishes to add the comma-separated list of
                   environment variables to those preserved from the user's environment.   The  security  policy
                   may return an error if the user does not have permission to preserve the environment.

       -e, --edit  Edit  one  or  more  files  instead of running a command.  In lieu of a path name, the string
                   "sudoedit" is used when consulting the security policy.  If the user  is  authorized  by  the
                   policy, the following steps are taken:

                   1.   Temporary  copies  are made of the files to be edited with the owner set to the invoking
                        user.

                   2.   The editor specified by the policy is run to edit  the  temporary  files.   The  sudoers
                        policy  uses  the  SUDO_EDITOR, VISUAL and EDITOR environment variables (in that order).
                        If none of SUDO_EDITOR, VISUAL or EDITOR are set, the first program listed in the editor
                        sudoers(5) option is used.

                   3.   If they have been modified, the temporary  files  are  copied  back  to  their  original
                        location and the temporary versions are removed.

                   To  help  prevent  the editing of unauthorized files, the following restrictions are enforced
                   unless explicitly allowed by the security policy:

                   •  Symbolic links may not be edited (version 1.8.15 and higher).

                   •  Symbolic links along the path to be edited are not followed when the parent  directory  is
                      writable by the invoking user unless that user is root (version 1.8.16 and higher).

                   •  Files  located  in  a  directory  that  is writable by the invoking user may not be edited
                      unless that user is root (version 1.8.16 and higher).

                   Users are never allowed to edit device special files.

                   If the specified file does not exist, it will be created.  Note that unlike most commands run
                   by sudo, the editor is run with the invoking user's environment  unmodified.   If,  for  some
                   reason,  sudo  is  unable  to  update a file with its edited version, the user will receive a
                   warning and the edited copy will remain in a temporary file.

       -g group, --group=group
                   Run the command with the primary group set to group instead of the primary group specified by
                   the target user's password database entry.  The group may be either a group name or a numeric
                   group-ID (GID) prefixed with the ‘#’ character (e.g., #0 for GID 0).  When running a  command
                   as  a  GID,  many  shells  require  that the ‘#’ be escaped with a backslash (‘\’).  If no -u
                   option is specified, the command will be run as the  invoking  user.   In  either  case,  the
                   primary  group  will  be  set  to group.  The sudoers policy permits any of the target user's
                   groups to be specified via the -g option as long as the -P option is not in use.

       -H, --set-home
                   Request that the security policy set the HOME environment  variable  to  the  home  directory
                   specified by the target user's password database entry.  Depending on the policy, this may be
                   the default behavior.

       -h, --help  Display a short help message to the standard output and exit.

       -h host, --host=host
                   Run the command on the specified host if the security policy plugin supports remote commands.
                   Note  that  the  sudoers plugin does not currently support running remote commands.  This may
                   also be used in conjunction with the -l option to list a user's  privileges  for  the  remote
                   host.

       -i, --login
                   Run  the shell specified by the target user's password database entry as a login shell.  This
                   means that login-specific resource files such as .profile, .bash_profile or  .login  will  be
                   read  by  the  shell.  If a command is specified, it is passed to the shell for execution via
                   the shell's -c option.  If no command is specified, an interactive shell is  executed.   sudo
                   attempts  to  change  to that user's home directory before running the shell.  The command is
                   run with an environment similar to the one a user would receive at log in.   Note  that  most
                   shells  behave differently when a command is specified as compared to an interactive session;
                   consult the shell's manual for details.  The Command environment section  in  the  sudoers(5)
                   manual documents how the -i option affects the environment in which a command is run when the
                   sudoers policy is in use.

       -K, --remove-timestamp
                   Similar  to  the -k option, except that it removes the user's cached credentials entirely and
                   may not be used in conjunction with a command or other option.  This option does not  require
                   a password.  Not all security policies support credential caching.

       -k, --reset-timestamp
                   When  used without a command, invalidates the user's cached credentials.  In other words, the
                   next time sudo is run a password will be required.  This option does not require  a  password
                   and was added to allow a user to revoke sudo permissions from a .logout file.

                   When used in conjunction with a command or an option that may require a password, this option
                   will cause sudo to ignore the user's cached credentials.  As a result, sudo will prompt for a
                   password  (if  one  is required by the security policy) and will not update the user's cached
                   credentials.

                   Not all security policies support credential caching.

       -l, --list  If no command is specified, list the allowed (and forbidden) commands for the  invoking  user
                   (or  the  user specified by the -U option) on the current host.  A longer list format is used
                   if this option is specified multiple times and the security policy supports a verbose  output
                   format.

                   If  a  command is specified and is permitted by the security policy, the fully-qualified path
                   to the command is displayed along with any command line arguments.  If a command is specified
                   but not allowed by the policy, sudo will exit with a status value of 1.

       -n, --non-interactive
                   Avoid prompting the user for input of any kind.  If a password is required for the command to
                   run, sudo will display an error message and exit.

       -P, --preserve-groups
                   Preserve the invoking user's group vector unaltered.  By default,  the  sudoers  policy  will
                   initialize  the  group vector to the list of groups the target user is a member of.  The real
                   and effective group-IDs, however, are still set to match the target user.

       -p prompt, --prompt=prompt
                   Use a custom password prompt with optional escape sequences.   The  following  percent  (‘%’)
                   escape sequences are supported by the sudoers policy:

                   %H  expanded  to  the  host  name including the domain name (on if the machine's host name is
                       fully qualified or the fqdn option is set in sudoers(5))

                   %h  expanded to the local host name without the domain name

                   %p  expanded to the name of the user whose password is being requested (respects the  rootpw,
                       targetpw, and runaspw flags in sudoers(5))

                   %U  expanded  to  the  login  name  of  the user the command will be run as (defaults to root
                       unless the -u option is also specified)

                   %u  expanded to the invoking user's login name

                   %%  two consecutive ‘%’ characters are collapsed into a single ‘%’ character

                   The custom prompt will override the default prompt specified by either the security policy or
                   the SUDO_PROMPT environment variable.  On systems that use PAM, the custom prompt  will  also
                   override the prompt specified by a PAM module unless the passprompt_override flag is disabled
                   in sudoers.

       -r role, --role=role
                   Run the command with an SELinux security context that includes the specified role.

       -S, --stdin
                   Write  the prompt to the standard error and read the password from the standard input instead
                   of using the terminal device.

       -s, --shell
                   Run the shell specified by the SHELL environment variable if it is set or the shell specified
                   by the invoking user's password database entry.  If a command is specified, it is  passed  to
                   the  shell  for  execution  via  the  shell's  -c  option.   If  no  command is specified, an
                   interactive shell is executed.  Note that most shells behave differently when  a  command  is
                   specified as compared to an interactive session; consult the shell's manual for details.

       -t type, --type=type
                   Run  the  command  with  an SELinux security context that includes the specified type.  If no
                   type is specified, the default type is derived from the role.

       -U user, --other-user=user
                   Used in conjunction with the -l option to list the privileges for user  instead  of  for  the
                   invoking  user.   The  security  policy  may  restrict  listing other users' privileges.  The
                   sudoers policy only allows root or a user with the ALL privilege on the current host  to  use
                   this option.

       -T timeout, --command-timeout=timeout
                   Used to set a timeout for the command.  If the timeout expires before the command has exited,
                   the  command will be terminated.  The security policy may restrict the ability to set command
                   timeouts.  The sudoers policy requires that user-specified timeouts be explicitly enabled.

       -u user, --user=user
                   Run the command as a user other than the default target user (usually root).  The user may be
                   either a user name or a numeric user-ID (UID) prefixed with the ‘#’ character (e.g.,  #0  for
                   UID  0).   When running commands as a UID, many shells require that the ‘#’ be escaped with a
                   backslash (‘\’).  Some security policies may restrict UIDs to those listed  in  the  password
                   database.   The  sudoers  policy allows UIDs that are not in the password database as long as
                   the targetpw option is not set.  Other security policies may not support this.

       -V, --version
                   Print the sudo version string as well as the version string of the security policy plugin and
                   any I/O plugins.  If the invoking user is  already  root  the  -V  option  will  display  the
                   arguments  passed  to  configure  when  sudo  was  built and plugins may display more verbose
                   information such as default options.

       -v, --validate
                   Update the user's cached credentials, authenticating the user if necessary.  For the  sudoers
                   plugin,  this  extends the sudo timeout for another 15 minutes by default, but does not run a
                   command.  Not all security policies support cached credentials.

       --          The -- option indicates that sudo should stop processing command line arguments.

       Environment variables to be set for the command may also be passed on the command line  in  the  form  of
       VAR=value, e.g., LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/usr/local/pkg/lib.  Variables passed on the command line are subject to
       restrictions  imposed by the security policy plugin.  The sudoers policy subjects variables passed on the
       command line to the same restrictions as normal environment variables with one important  exception.   If
       the  setenv option is set in sudoers, the command to be run has the SETENV tag set or the command matched
       is ALL, the user may  set  variables  that  would  otherwise  be  forbidden.   See  sudoers(5)  for  more
       information.
